G20 is the premier forum for international economic cooperation representing around 85% of the global GDP, over 75% of the global trade, and about two-thirds of the world population.
During the course of its G20 Presidency, India will host about 200 meetings in 32 different sectors in multiple locations across India.
The G20 Leaders’ Summit at the level of Heads of State/Government is scheduled to be held on September 9 and 10, 2023 in New Delhi.
According to Prime Minister Modi, this term can be an opportunity for India to share its expertise with the world in areas of women empowerment, democracy and digital technologies.
As a country with core democratic values, India can show the world that the scope of conflict can come to an end when democracy becomes a culture. This gains significance amidst the ongoing Russia-Ukraine conflict.
India’s foreign policy is focusing on the ‘global common good’. Through its G20 leadership, India hopes to extend this principle towards finding sustainable solutions to some of the key global challenges emerging out of the interconnectedness of the world, such as climate change, new and emerging technologies, food and energy security, etc.
During India’s Presidency, Indonesia and Brazil along with India would form the G20 Troika.
This would be the first time when the Troika would consist of three developing countries and emerging economies.
It is hoped that as a result there would be a shift in the balance of power within the G20 favouring emerging economies to have a greater share in decision-making at this grouping.
The G-20 Presidency presents a great opportunity for India to correct the long-standing anomalies that go against developing countries, especially in the domain of agriculture and food subsidies.
Read more on India’s G20 Presidency in the Sansad TV Perspective discussion.
G20 Summit 2022 – Indonesian Presidency
The G20 summit, the group’s first post-pandemic summit, recently took place in Bali, Indonesia, in the backdrop of the Russia-Ukraine crisis and a missile attack on Poland. The article gives a brief overview of the G20, highlights of the Bali summit and the significance of India’s G20 presidency.
Key Takeaways From G20 Summit 2022
Health:Leaders also reaffirmed their ongoing commitment to fostering a robust and long-lasting recovery that advances and maintains universal health care.
They hailed the World Bank’s creation of the “Pandemic Fund,” a new financial intermediary fund for pandemic prevention, preparedness, and response.
The World Health Organization (WHO), with assistance from other international organisations, has reaffirmed the commitment of world leaders to strengthen global health governance.
Digital Transformation & Digital Literacy
Leaders have acknowledged the significance of digital transformation in achieving sustainable development goals.
They pushed for further global cooperation to boost digital literacy and skills in order to maximise the benefits of the digital transformation, particularly for women, girls and those who are vulnerable.
Climate Change: G20 leaders decided to continue their efforts to keep the rise in global temperature to 1.5 degrees Celsius, reaffirming their commitment to the temperature goal in Paris 2015 agreement on climate change.
Food Security: The leaders praised the Black Sea grains project and pledged to take coordinated action to solve problems concerning food security.
Focus on the Global Economy: In a departure from last year’s focus on healing the wounds left by the Covid-19 outbreak, the G20 economies agreed in their declaration to pace interest rate rises cautiously to avoid spillovers and warned of “increasing volatility” in currency fluctuations.
Condemning Russian Aggression: 
Member nations issued a statement condemning Russia’s aggression in Ukraine “in the strongest terms” and calling for an immediate and complete withdrawal. 
They also acknowledged that although the majority of members had expressed their opposition to the war in Ukraine, “there were different opinions and differing assessments of the situation and sanctions.”
India Takes Over Presidency of the G20:
A summit of this size will be held for the first time in the nation in New Delhi on September 9 and 10, 2023.
According to the Indian Prime Minister, India’s G20 chairmanship theme of “One Earth, One Family, One Future” will be reflected in its inclusive, ambitious, definite, and action-oriented presidency.
Related Links
Climate Change In India	NCERT Notes on Climate Change	Paris 2015 Agreement
Kyoto Protocol	G7 G77 – Largest Intergovernmental Organization 
Challenges For G20 Countries
Rising Geopolitical Rifts: The global economy is having trouble coping with rising geopolitical rifts like the conflict between the world’s two largest economies, the US and China, or the drop in trade between the UK and the euro area following the Brexit vote.
Slow Down Of Major Economies: China, one of the main drivers of global economy, is currently experiencing a severe slowdown as a result of its ongoing real estate crisis.
Expected Recession: While some of the world’s largest economies, including the US and the UK, are expected to experience a recession, others, like countries in the euro area, are more likely to experience a slowdown or even a standstill.
Persistent High Inflation: Consistently rising inflation, which is reaching historic highs in a number of countries, has reduced purchasing power globally, slowing down economic growth.
Impact of Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine: In addition to greatly increasing geopolitical ambiguity, Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has also significantly increased worldwide inflation. The associated Western sanctions have made the situation worse. Read in detail about the Russia-Ukraine Conflict in the linked article.
Impact of Rising Inflation: Central banks around the world have hiked interest rates in response to the high inflation, which has further slowed down economic activity.